# Geniculata_rates

Data and code for the article (submitted):

***Correlated evolution and fast differentiation of non-homologous but functionally integrated male and female genitalia in a clade of stink bugs***

**Authors** - Bruno C. Genevcius (1,2), Daniel S. Caetano (3) and Cristiano F. Schwertner (1)
 
1 - Graduate Program in Ecology and Evolution, Federal University of São Paulo, Department of Biological Sciences - Diadema, SP, Brazil.
2 - University of São Paulo, Museum of Zoology (MZUSP) - São Paulo, SP, Brazil.
3 - University of Idaho, Department of Biological Sciences - Moscow, ID, U.S.A.

**Abstract:**
Intersexual coevolution of genitalia has been recently recognized as a widespread phenomenon. Despite advances on the modes of genitalic evolution and their potential mechanisms, the temporal aspect remains overlooked. An intriguing but unexplored question is how fast male and female genitalia may change in a coevolutionary scenario. We apply comparative phylogenetic analyses to test for correlated evolution and estimate how fast male and female external, non-homologous and functionally integrated genitalia change in a clade of stink bugs. We report three findings: the female gonocoxite 8 and the male pygophore showed a clear pattern of correlated evolution, both genitalia were estimated to evolve much faster than three non-genital traits, and rates of evolution of the male genitalia were twice faster than the female genitalia. Our results corroborate the widely held view that male genitalia evolve fast and add to the scarce evidence for rapidly evolving female genitalia. Different rates of evolution suggest distinct forms or strengths of selection over male and female genitalia. The morphological characteristics of this coevolutionary trend are more consistent with a cooperative adjustment of the genitalia, suggesting a scenario of female choice, morphological accommodation, lock-and-key or some combination of the three. Other alternative mechanisms are also discussed. Male genitalia are among the fastest evolving structures, but the modes of evolution of female genitalia are still subject of debate. Studies at various levels have show that female genitalia may either evolve independently or coevolve with male genitalia, but the latter seems prevalent when the traits are functionally connected. However, an intriguing and yet unexplored question is in which rates male and female genitalia change in a coevolutionary scenario. Using comparative phylogenetic methods we uncovered an intersexual coevolutionary dynamics in a clade of stink bugs and investigated in which rates each genitalia change over time. We also compared the rates between genitalia and three somatic characters frequently used in species-level phylogenies and studies on species delimitation. Both genitalia evolve much faster than all somatic traits, and female genitalia evolves approximately twice slower than male genitalia. This disparity suggests that male genitalia is probably the primary subject to selection, and female genitalia appears to be changing in response to provide a tight fit of the genitalia during copula. The observed patterns of covariation between the genitalia are more consistent with a cooperative fit expected under female choice or lock-and-key, but alternative mechanisms are also discussed.
